On May 22, 2013, a tragedy occured in Lilydale Regional National Park, Minnesota. A landslide killed a child and injured two others during a fourth-grade field trip on May 22nd, 2013. Fire Marshal Steve Zaccard noted that despite several days of rain softening the ground at the park, it remained open to the public. The ground, now saturated with this rain, gave way as a result. Brad Meyer, the city's parks and recreation spokesman, said it is rare to close a park "unless there is a major hazardous condition." Residents of the area say that the park has never been dangerous, running as an accident-free site for many years. The park has been a hotspot in recent years for fossil hunters and students on field trips.

Park caretakers should have taken action to ensure that the park was safe for the public. The injury was reasonably foreseeable since the because as Fire Marshal Zaccard said, “several days of rain had softened the ground at the park, but it remained open to the public.” The park caretakers were negligent and didn’t take sufficient action to ensure that the public were safe in a worst case scenario. Since the park was expecting students to visit on a field trip, heightened measures should have put into place because the risk of accident increases with more children, especially since these children would have been actively scavenging around the park. Children wouldn’t know theres a potential danger because their mindset would have been to have fun and enjoy their trip.

The legal elements of the cause of action is threefold: the duty of care, the standard of care, and causation. The duty of care must be established where the defendant has a responsibility to avoid reasonably foreseeable injuries towards the plaintiff. After the duty of care is established, a standard of care must be identified as a benchmark of whether the defendant’s actions were appropriate in providing enough care to the plaintiff. The standard of care that is expected of the defendant can vary based on the probability and potential extent of injury, and the opportunities to minimize the injuries.  Finally, a reasonably direct causation between the defendant’s conduct and the plaintiff’s injury is required for a cause of action. 

The first legal element of negligence is the existence of a duty of care. In this case, the elementary school children were utilizing the park’s services. As such, there was a special relationship between the elementary school children and the park staffs. Thus, a duty of care from the park staffs, the providers of the service, was established. This implies that the staffs were responsible for preventing any foreseeable harm to the children.

The second legal element of negligence is the standard of care. This element examines the precise level of responsibility that the park staffs should have on the safety of the children. As stated in the article, “several days of rain had softened the ground at the park”. While the city’s parks’ spokesman Brad Meyers claims that there were no indications that the park was unsafe, it was still the staff’s responsibility to warn visitors of the terrain. Ultimately, the park’s standard of care is to prevent injury and death of visitors.

The last legal element of negligence is the causation. It is conceivable that the accidents occurred at the park were due to a lack of warning, supervision and/or education regarding the terrain condition. Since it is reasonably foreseeable that heavily softened soil would induce landslides, the park’s staffs breached their duty of care. 

There are many defences the parks and recreations staff of the city can claim in attempts to defend themselves. To begin with, it can be said that the accident was not reasonably foreseeable. Reports of guests who have been visiting the park for several years stated that they had not seen any incident similar to this one on the park grounds. One of the guests have been visiting for 23 years without any known accidents. If this was the case, then preemptive measures to minimize the injuries from a landslide would not have had to be considered reasonably foreseeable. This defence could work because of the 23 year track record of the park. However, a single claim from a nearby resident may not be sufficient to prove this. The city should have records of accidents that have occurred in the park or general vicinity of the area. If the records show that weather had not caused any similar accidents in the area, it can be said that the accident was not in fact reasonably foreseeable.

Regardless of the fact if the event of a landslide was reasonably foreseeable or not, the article mentioned that even with harsh weather conditions, similar parks usually remain open; people would be in the park and the accident would have happened regardless. However, the caretakers of these parks have, especially a specialized park such as this one which deals with fossils, would have a higher standard of care. Because of this, this defence may not stand as strongly. As this park is known for fossils, it would most likely be the case that at one point the city had done an examination of the soil and the properties it possessed. This should include the effects weather and other hazards would have on the land. Caretakers of the facility should have knowledge of this at a higher level than someone who is not in this profession. Because of this, the defence may fail.

Lastly, the defendant can claim contributory negligence by the plaintiff(s). As the accident had not happened previously at the park, the adequacy of the supervision of the students may be put into question. If the defendant could prove that the plaintiffs were partially responsible for the accidents, the damages that would need to be repaid by the defendant would decrease. The defence could claim that if the supervision of the students was lacking, this increased the chances of an injury. This defence would most likely fail, since for years the park is visited constantly by students of the injured students’ age. As mentioned before, the standard of care should account for these types of situations, and if supervisors of the students did nothing out of the regular, there is no reason for them to be held responsible.

The May 22nd incident was a tragedy. Alongside the empathetic reporting of the young victims’ deaths and injuries, societal reaction will emerge, leading to shifts in the final resolution. As a result, upon reading articles of the incident, media audiences may spread the news amongst peers, increasing awareness. Society may begin avoiding government-run recreational landmarks in general, demonstrating their lack of approval and concern for safety in such regions. Although the landslide may not be reasonably foreseeable, the National Park Service was ethically responsible in maintaining the park’s grounds as a similar landslide had occurred 23 years ago. Thus, the final resolution may involve obligatory, active maintenance of park grounds to ensure safety for park-goers. Lastly, since the National Park Service is run by the federal government, the incumbent party may be reprimanded, shifting political popularity. All the factors combined may skew opinion, leading to biases in the final decision making process.
